In high school or Engineering Maths, you’ve
probably come across the concept of a complex
number.
A number has got two components, a real component
and an imaginary component.
The imaginary component is a real scalar B
multiplied by the imaginary number i, i being
the square root of -1.
We can extend this concept to what’s called
a hypercomplex number.
Now, instead of having just one imaginary
number i, we have imaginary numbers i, j,
and k.
They are each the square root of -1 and their
product is equal to -1.
So, the hypercomplex number has got one real
part and three imaginary parts.
Hypercomplex numbers are typically written
as a scalar plus a vector, s plus v.
The concept of hypercomplex numbers can be
traced back to the Irish mathematician, William
Hamilton.
The story goes that one day, he was walking
along the Canal in Dublin and the key equation,
i2 = j2 = k2 = ijk = -1 came in to his brain.
And, he carved the equation in to a stone
on the wall of the bridge.
And, there is today a plaque on this particular
bridge which commemorates this flash of genius
and inspiration.
The hypercomplex number is the basis of a
mathematical object that we call a quaternion.
I denote a quaternion as a Q with a little
circle above it.
So, we write it at s + v. S is a real scalar
and v is a vector representing the complex
part of this number.
Quaternions are often written in this form
as well where we have s and then inside angle
brackets, we have the three elements of the
vector part, the three imaginary parts of
the quaternion.
There are quite a few different ways of writing
quaternions.
This is the way that I will use in this lecture
and also the way that the robotics Toolbox
represents a quaternion in MATLAB.
Just as we can determine the magnitude or
length of a vector, we can determine the magnitude
or length of a quaternion and it’s the square
root of the sum of the four numeric elements
of the quaternion, it’s real part and the
three imaginary parts.
Now, we get to what’s called a unit quaternion
and this is a quaternion whose magnitude is
equal to 1.
Unit quaternions are particularly useful because
we can use them to encode rotation in three
dimensional space.
A unit quaternion has a lot of similarities
to the angle and axis representation that
we discussed in the last section.
The real part of the unit quaternion is equal
to the cosine of half the rotation angle and
the rotation axis which I have denoted here
by n-hat is related to the vector part of
the quaternion by this relationship which
involve sine of half the rotation angle.
I can compound two unit quaternions.
Just as we can compound two rotation matrices,
I can compound two quaternions and it’s
done by using this, what’s called the Hamiltonian
product rule.
So, quaternion 1 rotates me from frame A to
frame B. Quaternion 2 rotates me from frame
B to frame C, then, the product is the rotation
from frame A to frame C. And, I can compute
the inverse of a quaternion.
So if I use a quaternion to rotate me from
frame A to frame B, the inverse is quite simple.
It’s just the negation of the vector part
of the quaternion.
Once again, I’m going to create a fairly
arbitrary rotation matrix.
Going to start with some Euler angles, convert
them to rotation matrix 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, just
for the purpose of illustration.
Here we have a rotation matrix.
Now, I’m going to create a quaternion and
I use the quaternion class and I pass in as
an argument a rotation matrix.
And, the result is a quaternion object which
we can see in our workspace.
Now, the quaternion has got a real part and
an imaginary part, which is indicated inside
the angle brackets.
I’m going to park the quaternion into a
permanent variable called Q and let’s look
at what we can do with this quaternion object
in MATLAB.
One of the things that I can do is I can plot
this quaternion and look at the orientation
and it behaves just like the trplot function
that we looked at earlier.
I can compute the inverse of the quaternion,
and here it is here, and we can see that the
real part of the quaternion remains unchanged,
but the vector part is negated.
If I multiply the quaternion by its inverse,
the result is the null quaternion.
This has got a vector component equal to 0.
So this indicates a 0 rotation.
I can also compute that using the division
operator in MATLAB.
So, if I take a quaternion and effectively
divide it by the quaternion, it’s the same
as multiplying by its inverse.
I once again get the zero rotation.
If I have a quaternion and I multiply it by
a vector, let’s say a vector is a unit vector
in the x direction and I turn it to a column
vector by transposing it, then what this notation
in MATLAB does is to multiply the vector by
the quaternion.
Effectively, it rotates the vector.
Finally, I can do an example to illustrate
interpolation.
If I call quaternion with no arguments, it
returns a quaternion corresponding to the
null rotation.
So, if I use MATLAB syntax like this, I take
my null quaternion, interpolate it with the
other quaternion I have, Q, and I pass in
an argument which tells me the interpolation
fraction.
So, this is interpolating between the quaternion
Q0, the null rotation, and the quaternion
Q.
The last argument is the interpolation distance.
0 corresponds to the initial quaternion.
1 corresponds to the final quaternion.
If I pass in 0, the result should be our initial
quaternion.
Make it 1, the result will be our final quaternion.
And if I put in something like 0.5, this is
an interpolation halfway between the initial
quaternion and the final quaternion.
So this is a way to interpolate rotations
that are represented as quaternions.